\PassOptionsToPackage{unicode=true}{hyperref} % options for packages loaded elsewhere
\PassOptionsToPackage{hyphens}{url}
%
\documentclass[]{article}
\usepackage{lmodern}
\usepackage{amssymb,amsmath}
\usepackage{ifxetex,ifluatex}
\usepackage{fixltx2e} % provides \textsubscript
\ifnum 0\ifxetex 1\fi\ifluatex 1\fi=0 % if pdftex
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
  \usepackage{textcomp} % provides euro and other symbols
\else % if luatex or xelatex
  \usepackage{unicode-math}
  \defaultfontfeatures{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=MatchLowercase}
\fi
% use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
% use microtype if available
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{%
\usepackage[]{microtype}
\UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\IfFileExists{parskip.sty}{%
\usepackage{parskip}
}{% else
\setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
\setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}
}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\hypersetup{
            pdftitle={Looking for evidence of a high burden of COVID-19 in the United States from influenza-like illness data},
            pdfauthor={Nicholas G. Reich, Evan L. Ray, Graham C. Gibson, Estee Cramer, Caitlin M. Rivers},
            pdfborder={0 0 0},
            breaklinks=true}
\urlstyle{same}  % don't use monospace font for urls
\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}
\usepackage{graphicx,grffile}
\makeatletter
\def\maxwidth{\ifdim\Gin@nat@width>\linewidth\linewidth\else\Gin@nat@width\fi}
\def\maxheight{\ifdim\Gin@nat@height>\textheight\textheight\else\Gin@nat@height\fi}
\makeatother
% Scale images if necessary, so that they will not overflow the page
% margins by default, and it is still possible to overwrite the defaults
% using explicit options in \includegraphics[width, height, ...]{}
\setkeys{Gin}{width=\maxwidth,height=\maxheight,keepaspectratio}
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em}  % prevent overfull lines
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{0}
% Redefines (sub)paragraphs to behave more like sections
\ifx\paragraph\undefined\else
\let\oldparagraph\paragraph
\renewcommand{\paragraph}[1]{\oldparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi
\ifx\subparagraph\undefined\else
\let\oldsubparagraph\subparagraph
\renewcommand{\subparagraph}[1]{\oldsubparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi

% set default figure placement to htbp
\makeatletter
\def\fps@figure{htbp}
\makeatother


\title{Looking for evidence of a high burden of COVID-19 in the United States
from influenza-like illness data}
\author{Nicholas G. Reich, Evan L. Ray, Graham C. Gibson, Estee Cramer, Caitlin
M. Rivers}
\date{2020-04-03 12:13:30 CET}

\begin{document}
\maketitle

\hypertarget{introduction}{%
\subsection{Introduction}\label{introduction}}

In December 2019, an outbreak of a novel, the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus was
detected in Wuhan, China. In the intervening weeks, case counts have
grown substantially. As of this writing, there are over 896,450
confirmed cases globally and at least 45,525 deaths from what is
currently named COVID-19 {[}1{]}. It is now understood that the virus
transmits efficiently from person to person, with unmitigated R0
estimates above 2 and perhaps as high as 3.7 {[}2, 3{]}.

Community transmission is now ongoing in many locations in the United
States. Emerging phylogenetic data suggest that sequenced cases to date
in the United States and globally share a common ancestor between
mid-November and mid-December 2019. However, due to delays in making
widespread diagnostic testing available, the burden of COVID-19 in the
United States is not well understood. As an effort to understand trends
in people seeking care for respiratory symptoms, we analyze publicly
available data on influenza-like illness in the US. Specifically, we
compare the proportion of weighted influenza like illness (wILI) that
tests negative for influenza during the 2019-2020 flu season to trends
from previous seasons. If it were the case that SARS-CoV-2 were causing
widespread disease in the United States, we might expect to see in
recent weeks a higher fraction of ILI specimens that test negative for
influenza compared to the same time in past seasons.

\hypertarget{methods}{%
\subsection{Methods}\label{methods}}

\hypertarget{data}{%
\paragraph{Data}\label{data}}

We downloaded publicly available ILINet and WHO-NREVSS data for US
Health and Human Services (HHS) regions (Figure 1) and states.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{ili-labtest-report_files/figure-latex/hhs-regions-map-1.pdf}
\caption{\label{fig:hhs-regions-map}US HHS Regions are made up of groups
of states.}
\end{figure}

From the ILINet dataset, we downloaded weighted influenza-like illness
(wILI), which measures the percentage of doctor's office visits at
sentinel providers that had the primary complaint of fever plus an
additional influenza-like symptom (cough, and/or sore throat). For the
WHO-NREVSS data, we obtained the total number of specimens tested by
participating clinical laboratories, as well as the percent of those
specimens that tested positive for influenza. We used 23 seasons of data
for HHS regions, beginning with the 1997/1998 season, and 10 seasons of
data for states, beginning with the 2010/2011 season. All data sources
are available at the weekly time-scale, defined as using the MMWR week
standard used by the CDC.

The code used to produce this report is available on GitHub at
\url{https://github.com/reichlab/ncov}.

\hypertarget{influenza-like-illness-not-attributable-to-influenza}{%
\paragraph{Influenza-like illness not attributable to
influenza}\label{influenza-like-illness-not-attributable-to-influenza}}

One possible measure of influenza illness not attributable to influenza
(ILI-) can be calculated as follows:

\[\text{ILI-} = (1 - \text{proportion of tests positive for influenza}) \times \text{wILI}\]

It is important to note that reported wILI can vary substantially due to
differences in the types of health care providers reporting into ILINet.
Therefore, some increases in reported wILI from one season to another
may be driven in part by changes in provider type make up. An
approximate way to adjust for this is by dividing reported wILI by the
baseline for a given region and season. Baselines for HHS regions are
provided by the CDC. Baselines for states are calculated as the average
of the first two weekly ILI observations for a given season, thinking
that this adjusts for any systematic adjustments to the provider mix in
each season. These baselines enable the following calculation of a
\textbf{r}elative ILI-.

\[\text{rILI-} = (1 - \text{proportion of tests positive for influenza}) \times \frac{\text{wILI}}{\text{baseline level for ILI}}\]

\hypertarget{measuring-anomalies-in-ili--during-a-season}{%
\paragraph{Measuring anomalies in ILI- during a
season}\label{measuring-anomalies-in-ili--during-a-season}}

We developed a metric to measure the degree to which a given ILI-
observation is significantly higher or lower than expectation, based on
past trends at similar times of the year. For each region and
season-week, we averaged observations from the past seasons (22 seasons
for regions, 9 for states) for the given season week and one season week
on either side and calculated the standard deviation based on these same
observations. We then computed ``z-scores'' as the number of standard
deviations above or below the average a particular rILI- observation is:
\[\text{Z} =  \frac{\text{rILI-} - \overline{\text{rILI-}}}{sd{\text{rILI-}}}\]

\hypertarget{results-discussion}{%
\subsection{Results \& Discussion}\label{results-discussion}}

This report uses data downloaded on April 03, 2020, with data reported
through March 28, 2020.

\hypertarget{regional-level-analyses}{%
\subsubsection{Regional-level analyses}\label{regional-level-analyses}}

We plotted ILI- and rILI- as a function of the week within each flu
season and stratified by region (Figure 2). Additionally, we plotted the
2019/2020 Z-scores for all regions as a function of week of season
(Figure 3).

These results suggest that there may be enough COVID-19 circulating in
the United States to be detectable in the influenza-like illness
surveillance system. However, it is hard to determine this conclusively,
as we have not performed an exhaustive analysis about what other
pathogens were or were not ciruclating in those past seasons. Also,
media attention could also drive more individuals with mild
influenza-like illness symptoms to seek care than usual even in the
absence of widespread COVID-19 transmission in the US. If these
additional individuals seeking care were more likely to have an illness
not caused by influenza, then this could also drive up the rILI- metric.
Additionally, changes in influenza testing protocols or patterns could
also cause systematic changes in how the fraction of positive tests
compares to prior weeks or seasons.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{ili-labtest-report_files/figure-latex/all-region-plot-ILI-1.pdf}
\caption{\label{fig:all-region-plot}US HHS Regions plots showing rILI-
values since the 1997/1998 season (grey lines) and the 2019/2020 season
(dark black line). The line highlighted in red is the 2009/2010 H1N1
pandemic season. The dates on the x-axis correspond to the dates for the
2019/2020 season, with previous seasons lined up approximately the same
time by week. The vertical dashed line shows the date at which this plot
was generated. The small gap between the current season's data and the
line indicates the lag in ILI reporting, typically one week.}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{ili-labtest-report_files/figure-latex/std-dev-analysis-1.pdf}
\caption{Figure showing Z scores by week for each HHS region. Tiles with
a dark black outline indicate locations where the observed rILI- was
higher in that week of the season than had ever been observed in the
last 22 seasons.}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{state-level-analyses}{%
\subsubsection{State-level analyses}\label{state-level-analyses}}

Some states show an increased signal of non-influenza related ILI
(Figure 4). As of writing, numerous states are known to have community
transmission of SARS-CoV-2, but from this analysis alone we are not able
to determine whether that is contributing to the observed signal in
rILI-.

Numerous factors may be responsible for the rise in our estimates of ILI
caused by something other than influenza (rILI-). Provider type
(e.g.~pediatrician, hospital) is known to influence ILI data. In recent
weeks, some clinics that provide data to the ILINet system have not
reported data. If there are systematic differences in the population
seeking care at different providers, that could explain the recently
observed changes in ILI. Additionally, changes in testing protocols for
influenza could also impact how the accurately the percentage of ILI due
to influenza is estimated.

One can visually inspect the relationship between ILI levels
simultaneously compared to the percentage of influenza tests that are
positive (Figure 6). Notwithstanding some of the caveats listed above,
these trends are consistent with what we might expect to see if there
were widespread circulation of an ILI-causing pathogen that is not
influenza.

Syndromic surveillance data is best used to guide further investigation,
not as a definitive source. Additional study is needed to understand the
burden of SARS-CoV-2 across U.S. states. However, we believe that this
analysis could be used to guide and target areas for further
investigation

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{ili-labtest-report_files/figure-latex/calc-avg-sd-all-states-1.pdf}
\caption{Figure showing Z scores by week for each state in the US that
has collected and tested more than 5000 specimens for influenza during
the 2019/2020 season. Tiles with a dark black outline indicate locations
where the observed rILI- was higher in that week of the season than had
ever been observed in the last 22 seasons. Some states have no reported
tests for a given week and so the rILI- is missing for that week. States
are sorted by z-score in the most recent week, with highest scores at
the bottom (states with missing z-scores for the most recent week are at
the top).}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{ili-labtest-report_files/figure-latex/get-sd-data-1.pdf}
\caption{Individual state-level plots showing the proportion of ILI not
due to influenza over the current 2019/2020 season (dark black line) and
past 9 seasons, starting with 2010/2011. The six states with highest
current rILI- values relative to baseline are shown here.}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{ili-labtest-report_files/figure-latex/state-unweighted-ili-by-pos-neg-1.pdf}
\caption{Figure showing inferred breakdown of unweighted ILI into ILI
that is positive and negative for influenza for states with greater than
5,000 influenza tests run in the 2019/2020 season.Unweighted ILI
positive for influenza is calculated as the product of Unweighted ILI
and the proportion of laboratory tests positive for influenza.}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{works-cited}{%
\subsection{Works Cited}\label{works-cited}}

{[}1{]}
\url{https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200319-sitrep-59-covid-19.pdf?sfvrsn=c3dcdef9_2}

{[}2{]} Yang, Y., Lu, Q., Liu, M., Wang, Y., Zhang, A., Jalali, N.,
Dean, N., Longini, I., Halloran, M. E., Xu, B., Zhang, X., Wang, L.,
Liu, W., \& Fang, L. (2020). Epidemiological and clinical features of
the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak in China. MedRxiv,
2020.02.10.20021675. \url{https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.10.20021675}

{[}3{]} Imai, N., Cori, A., Dorigatti, I., Baguelin, M., Donnelly, C.
A., \& Riley, S. (n.d.). Report 3: Transmissibility of 2019-nCoV.
\url{https://www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/medicine/sph/ide/gida-fellowships/Imperial-2019-nCoV-transmissibility.pdf}.

\clearpage

\hypertarget{changelog}{%
\subsection{Changelog}\label{changelog}}

3 April 2020: updated for new ILI data, modified some conclusions to be
more generic for easier updating later.

27 March 2020: updated for new ILI data.

20 March 2020: Added figure to state level analysis showing estimated
breakdown of unweighted ILI into unweighted ILI positive for or negative
for influenza. Updated for new ILI data, and reframed the introduction
to acknowledge community transmission in the US and discussion to
accomodate new results.

13 March 2020: updated for new ILI data, including interpretation about
Missouri.

6 March 2020: updated for new ILI data, genomic commentary, some state
figures.

2 March 2020: Added state-level analysis, HHS region map, z-score code
and figure.

29 February 2020: updated for new ILI data. Minor rephrasing in intro.

21 February 2020: updated for new ILI data.

16 February 2020: updated to revise name of COVID-19, updated case
counts and ILINet data, added citations and revised statements about R0.

2 February 2020: Updated to include new ILINet data released on Friday,
Jan 31.

26 January 2020: Although our overall assessment has not changed and our
analysis has not been updated, we have updated the discussion to better
convey the level of uncertainty in our analysis. We also added a heavier
line for the 2019/2020 season in the figures.

25 January 2020: First version of report released.

\end{document}
